.. _sbxsect:

Investigate cross sections
==========================

It is not in general straight-forward to extract information about applied
interaction cross sections and associated mean free path lengths from
Geant4. Therefore, a custom mechanism was created in dgcode in the
:sbpkg:`G4XSectDump` package, to address this issue. Rather than attempting to
piece together the cross sections directly from the various Geant4 data files
and C++ algorithms, the mechanism described here instead works by intercepting
particles as they are actually being simulated inside an Geant4 job. Not only
does this approach have the advantage of reliably extracting the cross sections,
it in principle also works with any material and physics list.

.. note::

   If your material is defined by an :ref:`NCrystal cfg-string <sbmatgeneral>`,
   you can additionally use the ``nctool`` command to investigate the material,
   to get more detailed information about the thermal (:math:`<5\mathrm{eV}`)
   neutron scattering cross sections (for more information see :ref:`here
   <sbmatgeneral>`).

   However, non-neutron, non-scattering, or non-thermal cross sections of the
   material in the Geant4 simulations are not provided by ``nctool``, and must
   be investigated by using the tools discussed on the present page. Diligent
   users might wish to investigate a given material using both approaches.

How to extract cross sections
-----------------------------

The extraction can be invoked in two ways:

#. A generic command-line switch, ``-x``, exist on all :ref:`sim-scripts
   <sbsimscript>` (i.e. run ``sb_tricorder_sim -x`` if your script is in a
   package called "TriCorder"). Using this flag while launching a simulation job
   will result in cross sections being extracted for all combinations of
   particle types and materials which are actually encountered in the given job.
#. A command-line utility, ``sb_g4xsectdump_query``, exists for extracting and
   displaying information for a requested combination of material, particle type
   and physics list. By default, this command will also launch cross section
   plots automatically.

More specifically, the results are extracted in the form of custom data files,
each file containing cross section information for one particular combination of
particle type, Geant4 material and Geant4 physics list. In the
:sbpkg:`XSectParse` package are utilities which can be used to parse and analyse
those files, namely the ``sb_xsectparse_plotfile`` command and the two Python
modules ``XSectParse.ParseXSectFile`` and ``XSectParse.PlotXSectFile``.

The query script
----------------

The query script is used to conveniently handle both the launch of Geant4 and
the creation and analysis of cross section files, all via a simple interface:

.. include:: ../build/autogen_tricorder_g4xsectdump_query_help.txt
  :literal:

Here is an example where neutron cross sections in aluminium are extracted
(refer to the relevant documentation to learn more about the strings defining
:ref:`materials <sbmatdef>` or :ref:`physics lists <sbphyslist>`):

.. code-block:: sh

  $> sb_g4xsectdump_query -m 'stdlib::Al_sg225.ncmat'  -l QGSP_BIC_HP_EMZ -p neutron

As in fact, ``QGSP_BIC_HP_EMZ`` is the default :ref:`physics list <sbphyslist>`
and ``neutron`` is the default particle, we could have simply written:

.. code-block:: sh

  $> sb_g4xsectdump_query -m 'stdlib::Al_sg225.ncmat'

Note how the material definition string ``'stdlib::Al_sg225.ncmat'`` was quoted
with ``'`` characters. This is in general a good idea, since such strings might
contain special characters which could be otherwise be interpreted by your shell
rather than being passed to ``sb_g4xsectdump_query``.

In addition to launching interactive Matplotlib-based cross section plots,
either of the above commands produce a list of data files with cross section
information, a file with a dump of the G4Material, and files with plots like the
following:

|image1|\ |image2|

If additionally ``--wavelengths`` or ``-w`` is supplied on the command line, the
plots would instead show cross sections and mean-free-path lengths as a function
of neutron wavelength (for 0.1 to 25 Ã…):

|image3|\ |image4|

To investigate per-atom cross sections of particular elements or isotopes, one
can (ab)use the :ref:`gas-mixture features of NCrystal <sbmatgasmix>`, to create
a simple material which is modelled as a "noblegas" of such atoms. Here is for
example how to extract cross sections for Fe56:

.. code-block:: sh

  sb_g4xsectdump_query -m 'gasmix::Fe56'

This models the material as a gas of monoatomic non-interacting molecules (a
fake noble gas), and at default pressure and temperature values of 1atm and
293.15K respectively. Pressure and temperature could of course be overridden via
additional parameters, but it most likely does not make much sense to worry
about such details anyway, since Fe56 does not actually exist as a gas of
monoatomic molecules. Do note that mean-free-path and macroscopic cross sections
are therefore not really sensible for academic materials like ``gasmix::Fe56``,
but the per-atom absorption and epithermal scattering cross sections are very
much well defined.

Improving precision
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As indicated in the usage information dumped above, advanced-users who are
worried about random fluctuations or missing narrow peaks due to too low
sampling granularity can modify these via environment variables, for instance
like this:

.. code-block:: sh

  $> export G4XSECTSPY_NSAMPLE=100      # reduce fluctuations, default is 50
  $> export G4XSECTSPY_LOGDELTAE=0.0001 # increase granularity, default is 0.005
  $> sb_g4xsectdump_query -m"gasmix::Fe56"

In case you are wondering why you in the first place would ever need to sample a
cross section value at a given energy more than once, it is because some
processes in Geant4 actually employ random number generators in the calculation
of cross sections, supposedly in an effort to improve various modelling
characteristics when averaged over a large number of interactions. It might be
worth mentioning here that NCrystal does not employ such schemes.


Parsing utilities
-----------------

In addition to the query script mentioned above, there are also a few utilities
in the :sbpkg:`XSectParse` package for parsing and plotting the contents of
cross section files:

#. The command ``sb_xsectparse_plotfile`` which can be run on a cross section file
   to produce plots of the contents:

   .. include:: ../build/autogen_tricorder_xsectparse_plotfile_help.txt
     :literal:

#. Python modules for parsing or plotting the contents of the cross section files:

   .. code-block:: python

     import XSectParse.ParseXSectFile
     import XSectParse.PlotXSectFile

Implementation and limitations
------------------------------

There are many different kinds of processes in Geant4. Most are discrete, in the
sense that they might or might not take place (according to a mean-free-path
length based randomisation). These are the only kinds of cross sections
extracted by the mechanism discussed on the present page. Other non-discrete
processes such as decay and steady energy loss due to ionisation are
ignored. For the details, refer to the implementation in
:sbpkg:`XSectSpySteppingAction.hh<G4XSectDump/pycpp_XSectSpy/XSectSpySteppingAction.hh>`.


.. |image1| image:: images/xsects_discreteprocs_neutron__NCrystal::stdlib::Al_sg225.ncmat__QGSP_BIC_HP_EMZ.xsect.png
   :height: 250px
.. |image2| image:: images/xsects_discreteprocs_neutron__NCrystal::stdlib::Al_sg225.ncmat__QGSP_BIC_HP_EMZ.mfp.png
   :height: 250px
.. |image3| image:: images/wls_xsects_discreteprocs_neutron__NCrystal::stdlib::Al_sg225.ncmat__QGSP_BIC_HP_EMZ.xsect.png
   :height: 250px
.. |image4| image:: images/wls_xsects_discreteprocs_neutron__NCrystal::stdlib::Al_sg225.ncmat__QGSP_BIC_HP_EMZ.mfp.png
   :height: 250px
